\section*{Abstract}

The are many benefits to mathematical reasoning in science;
nevertheless, there has been almost no work in formalising scientific
experiments themselves. Here, we propose a formal framework for
experimentation and analysis in physiology. First, we define a
structure for physiological quantities. This structure emphasises the
critical role of time in physiology, but is flexible, in that it can
carry information of any type. Thus, we define an ontology of
physiological quantities that can describe a wide range of
observations. Second, we show that experiments themselves can be
composed as a wiring of time-dependent quantities, and be expressed as
purely mathematical equations that can be manipulated
algebraically. Our framework is concise, allowing entire experiments
to be defined unambiguously in a few equations. To demonstrate the
practicality and versatility of our approach, we show the full
equations for two non-trivial implemented and analysed experiments
describing visually stimulated neuronal responses and dynamic
clamp. The brevity of these definitions illustrates the power of our
approach, and we discuss its implications for neuroinformatics
research.

\section*{Introduction}

Formalising scientific inference in mathematical frameworks removes
ambiguity and thus allows protocols to be formulated efficiently,
knowledge to be communicated transparently, and inferences to be
scrutinised \citep{Soldatova2006, Jaynes2003, Krantz1971}. Many
aspects of the scientific enterprise, including hypothesis testing,
estimation, and optimal parameter choice, are addressed rigorously in
\emph{statistics} and \emph{experimental design}. Nevertheless,
without knowing where observations come from, it is difficult to
ascertain whether they provide evidence for a given hypothesis
\citep{Tukey1962}. Formalising the experiments themselves is difficult
because they produce heterogeneous data, and because experiments
interact with the physical world and therefore cannot be described
purely by relations between mathematical objects. Consequently,
experiments are invariably described in natural languages and carried
out manually or by \emph{ad hoc} computer code. Formalisations have
focused on the execution of specific experiments \citep{Jenkins1989,
  Manduchi1990, King2004} that seem difficult to generalise.

Whether they are carried out by humans or by automated equipment, many
experiments can be seen as \emph{programs} that manipulate and observe
the real world. This view suggests that experiment descriptions must
resemble programming languages. In creating a mathematical framework
for experiments, we take advantage of progress in embedding side
effects, such as input and output \citep{PeytonJones2002, Roy2004,
  Wadler1995} into purely equational programming languages, that is
languages that can only evaluate mathematical functions
\citep{Church1941}. These languages, unlike conventional programming
languages, retain an important characteristic of mathematics: terms
can be freely substituted by terms with identical meanings. This
property \citep[referential transparency;][]{Whitehead1927} enables
algebraic manipulation and reasoning about the programs
\citep{Bird1996}. This is important in the context of experiments,
because it means that an observation can always be defined with a
single equation.

Here, we formalise physiological experiments in a mathematical
framework. Our work is based on Functional Reactive Programming
\citep[FRP;][]{Elliott1997, Nilsson2002}, an elegant formulation of
time-dependent reactive computer programs. We show that there is
substantial overlap between the concepts introduced by FRP and
physiological observations; consequently, physiological experiments
can be concisely defined in a FRP-like language. This framework does
not describe the physical components of biological organisms; it has no
concept of networks, cells or proteins. Instead it describes the
observation and calculation of the mathematical objects that
constitute physiological evidence.

Our framework provides:

(i) an explicitly defined ontology of physiological observations. We
outline a flexible but concisely defined structure for physiological
quantities. This ontology can form the basis for repositories of
physiological data and meta-data. Unlike in bioinformatics or anatomy,
physiological databases have not found widespread adoption
\citep{Herz2008, Amari2002}, despite many attempts \citep{Katz2010,
  Teeters2008, Gardner2004, Jessop2010}. We suggest that the
flexibility of our ontology can remedy some of the structural
shortcomings of existing databases \citep{Gardner2005, Amari2002} and
thus facilitate data sharing \citep{Insel2003}.

(ii) a new language for describing complex experiments and analysis
procedures in physiology. Thus experimental protocols can be
communicated unambiguously, highlighting differences between studies
and facilitating replication and meta-analysis. In addition,
expressions in our framework can be components of precisely
formulated scientific theories.

(iii) an new approach to validating scientific inference
\citep{Editors2003}. By inspecting an experiment definition, automated
decision procedures can verify statements about experiments that
indicate sound scientific practice, such as consistent units of
measure \citep{Kennedy1997} and correct error propagation
\citep{Taylor1997}. The use of formal languages can thus bring
transparency to complex experiments and analyses.

(iv) a practical tool that is powerful and generalises to multimodal
experiments. We have implemented our framework as a new programming
language and used it for non-trivial neurophysiological experiments
and data analyses.

Here, we first describe the theory of \emph{simple types}
\citep{Pierce2002} and define three types that can represent
physiological evidence. We then present a new formal and
machine-executable language, the \emph{calculus of physiological
  evidence}, for defining observations and transformations of such
evidence. Finally, we show that two very different experiments from
neurophysiology can be formally defined, run and analysed in our
calculus. In the first example, we measure \emph{in vivo} spike train
responses to visual stimulation in locusts. In the second example, we
examine the impact of an active potassium conductance on synaptic
integration using the dynamic clamp technique. These protocols are
defined unambiguously using only a handful of equations in our
language.

\section*{Old Introduction}

Mechanical reasoning removes ambiguity and thus allows ideas to be
formulated and communicated efficiently, and inferences to be
scrutinised. Consequently, formal languages and calculi have had a
profound impact on mathematics and the natural sciences. As examples
we point to Leibniz's notation for calculus, vector notation in
electromagnetism and first-order logic. Such languages are useful
because they allow us to calculate --- to re-arrange, isolate and
substitute terms --- and by doing so, to prove general theorems. These
symbolic manipulations are possible because terms can be replaced by
terms with identical meaning without changing the meaning of the
context. For instance, no matter how or where the quantity |w| is
defined, |w+w| can always be substituted by |2*w|. This property,
which is called referential transparency \citep{Whitehead1927}, is
shared by all ``mathematical'' notations but not by conventional
programming languages.

Although we can describe quantitative scientific models rigorously,
there are few formalisms to fully describe how evidence for or against
these models is obtained and evaluated. A mathematical approach to
experimentation itself could facilitate replication and meta-analysis,
permit a better understanding of apparent inconsistencies between
studies and allow a clearer formulation of what constitutes sound
scientific practice.  Here, we propose a calculus of physiological
evidence that can describe experiments on biological organisms such
that they can be unambiguously replicated and be inspected to certify
whether analysis procedures are applicable. 

Whether they are carried out by humans or by automated equipment, many
experiments can be seen as \emph{programs} that manipulate and observe
the real world. This view suggests that experiment descriptions must
resemble programming languages, and that a referentially transparent
calculus of experiments could come from programming language
theory. Although it is not trivial to describe interactions with the
real world without breaking referential transparency, several such
formalisms are available \citep{PeytonJones2002, Roy2004}. Which
amongst those describe experiments most naturally may depend on the
kinds of manipulations and observations that are made. Here, we
describe a structure for physiological evidence that gives rise to an
elegant approach for purely mathematical transformations to interact
with the physical world.  We have implemented this calculus of
evidence in a concrete programming language and used it for
non-trivial neurophysiological experiments and data analysis. First,
we describe the theory of \emph{simple types} and define three types
that can represent physiological evidence. We then present a new
formal and machine-executable language for defining observations and
transformations of such evidence. Finally, we show that two very
different experiments from neurophysiology can be formally defined,
run and analysed in our calculus. In the first example, we measure
\emph{in vivo} spike train responses to visual stimulation in
locusts. In the second example, we examine the impact of an active
potassium conductance on synaptic integration using the dynamic clamp
technique. These protocols are defined unambiguously using only a
handful of equations in our language. 
